XVI CURSED, CURSED CREATOR! Why did I live? Why in that instant did I not extinguish the
spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not. Despair had not yet
taken possession of me. My feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure
have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants, and have glutted myself with their shrieks
and misery. When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood, and now no longer
of discovery. I gave vent to my anguish and fearful howlings. I was like a wild beast
that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through
the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh, what a miserable night I passed! The cold stars
shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me. Now and then the
sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All save I were at rest
or in enjoyment. I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathized
with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then
to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin. But this was a luxury of sensation that could
not endure. I became fatigued with excessive bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass
in the sick impotence of despair. There was none among the myriads of men that existed
who would pity or assist me. And should I feel kindness towards my enemies? No, from
that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all against him
who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. The sun rose. I heard
the voices of men and knew that it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly
I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection
on my situation. The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree
of tranquility, and when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not help
believing that I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently.
It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father on my behalf, and I was a fool
in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I ought to have familiarized
the old DeLacy to me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family,
when they should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not believe my errors
to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the cottage, seek
the old man, and by my representations win him to my party. These thoughts calmed me,
and in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep. But the fever of my blood did not allow
me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was forever acting
before my eyes. The females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's
feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my
hiding place and went in search of food. When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps
towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I
crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the
family arose. That hour passed. The sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did
not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the
cottage was dark, and I heard no motion. I cannot describe the agony of this suspense.
Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage they entered into conversation
using violent gesticulations. But I did not understand what they said as they spoke the
language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. Soon after, however,
Felix approached with another man. I was surprised as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage
that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual
appearances.
"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, "'that you will be obliged to pay three
months' rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair advantage,
and I beg, therefore, that you will take some days to consider of your determination.'
"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix. We can never again inhabit your cottage. The
life of my father is in the greatest danger, going to the dreadful circumstances that I
have related. My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat
you not to reason with me any more. Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this
place.' Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion entered the cottage
in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed. I never saw any of the family
of De Lacy more.
I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair.
My protectors had departed and had broken the only link that held me to the world. For
the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive
to control them. But allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards
injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacy, the gentle eyes
of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished, and a gush
of tears somewhat soothed me. But again, when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted
me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, I turned
my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced I placed a variety of combustibles
around the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.
As the night advanced a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the cloud
that had loitered in the heavens. The blast tore along like a mighty avalanche and produced
a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted
the dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage. My eyes still
fixed on the western horizon, my brand. It sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw
and heath and bushes which I had collected. The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage
was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked
and destroying tongues. As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods. And now, with the
world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene
of my misfortunes. But to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At
least my mind. I learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator, and to
whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life. Among the lessons
that Felix had bestowed upon Safi, geography had not been omitted. I had learned from these
the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as
the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to proceed. But how
was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach
my destination, but the sun was my only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that
I was to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human being. But I did not despair.
From you only could I hope for Sukkur, although towards you I felt no sentiment, but that
of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only
had I any claim for pity and redress. And from you I determined to seek that justice
which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human form. My travels
were long, and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late in autumn when I quitted the district
where I had so long resided. I traveled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage
of a human being. Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless. Rain and snow
poured around me, mighty rivers were frozen, the surface of the earth was hard and chill
and bare, and I found no shelter. Oh earth, how often did I implicate curses on the cause
of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness. The nearer I approached your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the
spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but I
rested not. A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country.
But I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite,
no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food. But a circumstance
that happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered
its warmth and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in a special manner the bitterness
and horror of my feelings. I generally rested during the day and traveled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding that my path lay
through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen. The day,
which was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine
and the bombiness of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure that had long appeared
dead revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself
to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy.
Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness
towards the blessed sun which bestowed such joy upon me. I continued to wind among the
paths of the wood until I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river
into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I
paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the sound of voices that induced
me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl
came running towards the spot where I was concealed laughing, as if she ran from someone
in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river when suddenly
her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding place and
with extreme labor, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.
She was senseless, and I endeavored by every means in my power to restore animation the
deeper parts of the woods. I followed speedily, I hardly knew why, but when the man saw me
drew near, he aimed a gun, which he carried at my body and fired. I sank to the ground,
and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. This was then the reward
of my benevolence. I had saved a human being from destruction, the feelings of kindness
and gentleness which I had entertained, but a few moments before gave place to hellish
rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all
mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me. My pulses paused, and I fainted. I was
for some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavoring to cure the wound which
I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there
or passed through. At any rate, I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily
revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured.
After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey. The labors I endured were no longer
to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring. All joy was but a mockery
which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made
for the enjoyment of pleasure. But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from
this time I reached the environs of Geneva. It was evening when I arrived, and I retired
to a hiding place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you. I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes
of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura. At
this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection which was disturbed
by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen
with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that
this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed
a horror of deformity. If therefore I could seize him and educate him as my companion
and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. Urged by this impulse
I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form
he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shriek. I drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to hurt you. Listen
to me. He struggled violently. Let me go, he cried. Monster! Ugly wretch! You wish to
eat me and tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go or I will tell my papa. Boy, you
will never see your father again. You must come with me. Hideous monster! Let me go.
My papa is a syndic. He is Monsieur Frankenstein. He will punish you. You dare not keep me.
Frankenstein! You belong then to my enemy. To him towards whom I have sworn eternal revenge
you shall be my first victim. The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which
carried despair to my heart. I grasped his throat to silence him and in a moment he lay
dead at my feet. I gazed on my victim and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph. Clapping my hands, I exclaimed, I too can create desolation. My enemy is not
invulnerable. This death will carry despair to him and a thousand other miseries shall
torment and destroy him.
As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast. I took it. It was
a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted
me. For a few moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by dark lashes and
her lovely lips. But presently my rage returned. I remembered that I was forever deprived of
the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance
I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and of fright.
Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? I only wonder that at that moment,
instead of venting my sensations and exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and
perish in the attempt to destroy them. While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the
spot where I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered
a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. A woman was sleeping on some straw. She was
young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect
and blooming in the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-emparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. And then I bent over her and whispered,
Awake, fairest, thy lover is near. He would give his life but to obtain one look of affection
from thine eyes. My beloved, awake!
The sleeper stirred. A thrill of terror ran through me. Should she indeed awake and see
me and curse me and denounce the murderer? Thus would she assuredly act if her darkened
eyes opened and she beheld me. The thought was madness. It stirred from the fiend within
me. Not I, but she shall suffer. The murder I have committed because I am forever robbed
of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her. Be hers
the punishment.
Thanks to the lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work mischief.
I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. She moved
again and I fled.
For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing
to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and its miseries forever. At length
I wandered towards these mountains and have ranged through their immense recesses consumed
by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to
comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable. Man will not associate with me,
but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion
must be of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.